

Topic #: Predicting anti-cancer drug potentials (as a multiple kernel learning problem)


Instructor: Hongyu Su (hongyu.su@aalto.fi)


Background:

Can you figure out the cancer inhibition potentials of drug molecules without getting your hands dirty? How to compute the similarity of two graphs using kernel methods? How to work with the support vector machines in practice? What if you have varying kinds of similarity measures on a same collection of objects? How to compute a better measures out of many? Is machine learning more about mathematical modeling, or programming, or both? You will have a chance to explore the answers by approaching the anti-cancer drug potential prediction with multiple kernel learning methods.


Goal:

The goal of the project lies in the following aspects. (1) Model a biological question as a classification learning problem, e.g., applying data structure, defining input and output. (2) Retrieve data from public online database, perform preprocessing steps on the raw data. (3) Measure the similarity of two graphs (small drug molecules) with different kernel methods. (4) Prepare the input and output into required forms. (5) Combine different similarity measures with the multiple kernel learning approach. (6) Apply single label classification method (e.g., support vector machines) with individual similarity measures. (7) Report the classification performances of different similarity measures.


Required background knowledge and skills: 

The background knowledge required by the project includes, e.g., basic knowledge in statistical machine learning, basic knowledge in classification learning, understanding the basic principle of support vector machines, some knowledge in kernel methods for high-dimensional feature maps. The practical work requires some programming skills of Matlab, R, and Python. Bash scripting can be helpful. Some addition knowledge in working with computer cluster will give extra advantage of working out the problem. The project does not assume strong knowledge in biology (e.g., drug screen). Extra knowledge in biology may help better understand the problem.


Materials and methods:

The dataset used in this project is NCI-60 tumor screen data [1]. The raw data can be obtained from PubChem. The preprocessed data with complete preprocessing scripts are available from GitHub (https://github.com/hongyusu/molecular_classification). The student is expected to understand the preprocessing steps (https://github.com/hongyusu/molecular_classification/blob/master/data/Readme), and is encouraged to repeat the preprocessing steps to get an overview of the data. However, this is not required. The results provided from preprocessing can be directly used in the machine learning algorithms.

Graph kernels will be applied to measure the similarity of molecules. In this project, the student will get familiar with the computation of three different kinds of fingerprint kernels (results are provided), and compute other graph kernels (e.g., random walk kernel, shortest path kernel, graphlet kernel) using a Matlab package (http://www.bsse.ethz.ch/mlcb/research/machine-learning/graph-kernels.html). Varying graph kernels are combined with centered kernel alignment [2] which is recently developed with good empirical results. Additionally, we will model the problem as single label classification and use support vector machines to make predictions.


References: 

[1] Su, Hongyu; Heinonen, Markus; Rousu, Juho. Structured Output Prediction of Anti-cancer Drug Activity. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Pattern Recognition in Bioinformatics (PRIB 2010), Springer Lecture Note in Computer Science (LNCS) 6282:265--273.
[2] Corina Cortes, Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh. Algorithms for learning kernels based on center alignment. Journal of Machine Learning Research 13(2012) 795--828
[3] More references about graph kernels are from http://www.bsse.ethz.ch/mlcb/research/machine-learning/graph-kernels.html.



