

Topic #: Hierarchical molecular classification


Instructor: Hongyu Su (hongyu.su@aalto.fi)


Background:

Ontology is a hierarchical annotation system in chemistry where each chemical compound is classified against the system and assigned to a leave node of the system. The route from root node down to the leave node reveals various chemical and biological properties of the compound. In some applications where we don't know the exact structure of the compound (e.g., in mass spectrometer data analysis), we obtain some descriptors and try to predict the ontology of the compound in the hope that the ontology will help to figure out the exact structure.

How difficult is it to accurately predict the ontology? How to work with the support vector machines in practice? How to predict a graph? Is machine learning more about mathematical modeling, or programming, or both? You will have a chance to explore the answers by working on the hierarchical molecular classification problem.


Goal:

The goal of the project lies in the following aspects. (1) Model a biological question as a classification learning problem, e.g., applying data structure, defining input and output. (2) Prepare the input and output into required forms. (3) Get familiar with structured output learning algorithms and apply it to the hierarchical molecular classification problem. (4) Design the experiments and report the performances.


Required background knowledge and skills: 

The background knowledge required by the project includes, e.g., basic knowledge in statistical machine learning, basic knowledge in classification learning, understanding the basic principle of support vector machines, some knowledge in kernel methods for high-dimensional feature maps. The practical work requires some programming skills of the following languages, Matlab, R, Python. Bash scripting can be helpful. Some addition knowledge in working with computer cluster will give extra advantage of working out the problem. The project does not assume strong knowledge in biology (e.g., mass spectrometry). Extra knowledge in biology may help better understand the problem.


Materials and methods:

The ontology data can be retrieved from ChEBI. The data is represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where each node in the DAG is a term in the hierarchical annotation system. Additional, for each chemical compound, we obtain the fingerprint from PubChem and OpenBabel, which will be used as feature representation of the compound. Specifically, the fingerprint is a binary bit vector where each position corresponds to the presence or absence of a predefined substructure. As a result, we obtain 1143 compounds with both fingerprint and ontology information. 

The method used in this project is random spanning tree approximation (RTA) algorithm [2] which is a structured output learning algorithm for multilabel classification. The student can either use the original implementation of the algorithm (https://github.com/hongyusu/RTA) or use the latest version currently under test (https://github.com/hongyusu/L2RTA). The only difference is the inference algorithm in which the latter one is faster.


References: 

[1] Su, Hongyu; Heinonen, Markus; Rousu, Juho. Structured Output Prediction of Anti-cancer Drug Activity. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Pattern Recognition in Bioinformatics (PRIB 2010), Springer Lecture Note in Computer Science (LNCS) 6282:265--273.
[2] Mario Marchand, Hongyu Su, Emilie Morvant, Juho Rousu, John Shawe-Taylor Multilabel Structured Output Learning with Random Spanning Trees of Max-Margin Markov Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27(NIPS 2014), 873--881.



